---
layout: post
title:  "QEMU and the Spectre and Meltdown attacks"
date:   2018-01-04 18:00:00 +0000
last_modified_at: 2018-01-05 10:30:00 +0000
author: Paolo Bonzini and Eduardo Habkost
categories: [meltdown, spectre, security, x86]
---
As you probably know by now, three critical architectural flaws in CPUs have
been recently disclosed that allow user processes to read kernel or hypervisor
memory through cache side-channel attacks.  These flaws, collectively
named _Meltdown_ and _Spectre_, affect in one way or another almost
all processors that perform out-of-order execution, including x86 (from
Intel and AMD), POWER, s390 and ARM processors.

No microcode updates are required to block the _Meltdown_ attack; it is
enough to update the guest operating system to a version that separates
the user and kernel address spaces (known as _page table isolation_ for
the Linux kernel).  Therefore, this post will focus on _Spectre_, and
especially on [CVE-2017-5715](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2017-5715).

Fixing or mitigating _Spectre_ in general, and CVE-2017-5715 in particular,
requires cooperation between the processor and the operating system kernel or
hypervisor; the processor can be updated through microcode or millicode
patches to provide the required functionality.

Among the three vulnerabilities, CVE-2017-5715 is notable because
it allows guests to read potentially sensitive data from hypervisor
memory.  Patching the host kernel is sufficient to block attacks from
guests to the host.  On the other hand, in order to protect the guest
kernel from a malicious userspace, updates are also needed to the guest
kernel and, depending on the processor architecture, to QEMU.

Just like on bare-metal, the guest kernel will use the new functionality
provided by the microcode or millicode updates.  When running under a
hypervisor, processor emulation is mostly out of QEMU's scope, so QEMU's
role in the fix is small, but nevertheless important.  In the case of KVM:

* QEMU configures the hypervisor to emulate a specific processor model.
For x86, QEMU has to be aware of new CPUID bits introduced by the microcode
update, and it must provide them to guests depending on how the guest is
configured.

* upon virtual machine migration, QEMU reads the CPU state on the source
and transmits it to the destination.  For x86, QEMU has to be aware of new
model specific registers (MSRs).

Right now, there are no public patches to KVM that expose the new CPUID bits
and MSRs to the virtual machines, therefore there is no urgent need to update
QEMU; remember that __updating the host kernel is enough to protect the
host from malicious guests__.  Nevertheless, updates will be posted to the
qemu-devel mailing list in the next few days, and a 2.11.1 patch release
will be released with the fix.

Once updates are provided, __live migration will not be enough to protect
guest kernel from guest userspace__.  Because the virtual CPU has to be
changed to one with the new CPUID bits, the guest will have to be restarted.

As of today, the QEMU project is not aware of whether similar changes will
be required for non-x86 processors.  If so, they will also posted to the
mailing list and backported to recent stable releases.

For more information on the vulnerabilities, please refer to the [Google Security
Blog](https://security.googleblog.com/2018/01/todays-cpu-vulnerability-what-you-need.html)
and [Google Project
Zero](https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.it/2018/01/reading-privileged-memory-with-side.html)
posts on the topic, as well as the [Spectre and Meltdown FAQ](https://meltdownattack.com/#faq).

__5 Jan 2018__: clarified the level of protection provided by the host kernel
update; added a note on live migration.
