---
layout: post
title:  "QEMU version 11.0.0 released"
date:   2026-04-22 11:11:00 -0500
categories: [releases, 'qemu 11.0']
---
We'd like to announce the availability of the QEMU 11.0.0 release. This release contains 2500+ commits from 237 authors.

You can grab the tarball from our [download page](https://www.qemu.org/download/#source). The full list of changes are available [in the changelog](https://wiki.qemu.org/ChangeLog/11.0).


Highlights include:

 * New "nitro" accelerator to run AWS Nitro Enclaves natively, and improved support for MSHV and WHPX accelerators.
 * KVM: Support for CET virtualization.
 * KVM: Reset support for SEV-SNP and TDX confidential VMs.
 * virtio-gpu support for native context drivers and specifying a unique resolution for each output.
 * TCG: in-tree support for C++ plugins.
 * NFS block driver support for libnfs v6 and various improvements to curl/FUSE block drivers.
 * ARM: support for CPU features FEAT_ASID2 and FEAT_E2H0.
 * ARM: TCG emulation support for SME (Scalable Matrix Extension), and HVF accelation of SME2 on macos (if the host CPU supports it).
 * HPPA: SeaBIOS-hppa v24 now implements the Astro PCI initializaiton (allowing for PCI VGA on 64-bit systems), improves upcoming HP-UX 64-bit support, and has initial support for multicell machines.  Prior versions also have fixes and updates for 64-bit/PAT support and other areas as well.
 * HPPA: Emulation support for 64-bit CPUs with 40 and 44 bit address spaces, and 64-bit GDB support.
 * LoongArch: KVM PMU migration support.
 * LoongArch: TCG emulation support for LA v1.1, sc.q, llacq/screl/ and estimated reciprocal instructions.
 * PowerPC: snapshot support for several ppc devices.
 * RISC-V: ISA extensions support for Zilsd, Zclsd, ZALASR, and Smpmpmt.
 * RISV-V: CPU support for MIPS P8700 CPUs, better reporting of CSR registers in 'info registers', and other fixes and improvements.
 * s390: emulation support for "DIVIDE TO INTEGER" instruction.
 * s390: support for booting from virtio-blk-pci devices.
 * x86: CPU support for Diamond Rapids
 * x86: support for a new "nitro" accelerator and machine type to run Nitro Enclaves natively under QEMU.
 * and lots more...

Thank you to everybody who contributed to this release, whether that was by writing code, reporting bugs, improving documentation, testing, or providing the project with CI resources. We couldn't do these without you!
